Hairy-cell leukemia (HCL) is a mature B-cell lymphoid cancer that is commonly treated with purine analogues.1 Virtually all patients with HCL carry the BRAF V600E mutation, which constitutively activates the MEK–ERK pathway and which can be inhibited in vitro by the mutation-specific BRAF inhibitor PLX-4720.2
BRAF mutations have been identified in melanoma but are found across cancers.3 An inhibitor of mutated BRAF (vemurafenib) has transformed the treatment of melanoma. It is unclear whether this clinical efficacy can be extrapolated to other cancers.4,5 We used vemurafenib in a patient with refractory HCL and a pressing need for treatment (platelet count, 27,000 per cubic millimeter; neutrophil count, 314 per cubic millimeter). The 51-year-old male patient received a diagnosis of classical HCL in 2009. He did not have a response to conventional treatments (Figure 1AFIGURE 1
Effect of Low-Dose Vemurafenib on Blood Counts, Bone Marrow Infiltration, and the Hairy-Cell Leukemia Clone in a Patient with Hairy-Cell Leukemia.
). After the provision of counseling and the demonstration of BRAF V600E in the leukemic cells (Figure 1B), the patient provided consent for vemurafenib treatment. The rate of bone marrow infiltration was 70%, and massive splenomegaly (24.8 cm by 8.3 cm) and severe cytopenia (Figure 1A) were present. Treatment was begun at a dose of 240 mg twice daily, followed by a slow escalation of the dose.
Within days, the spleen softened and decreased in size (to 18.8 cm by 6.9 cm on day 6 and 14.0 cm by 5.0 cm on day 17). Platelet, hemoglobin, and granulocyte counts rose to levels not observed since diagnosis (Figure 1A). Complete-remission criteria were met on day 43, and treatment was terminated on day 56. At this point, there was no evidence of disease persistence on the basis of immunophenotyping of the peripheral blood and trephine-biopsy findings, but a small HCL clone was detectable by immunophenotyping of the bone marrow sample (<0.1% of cells).
The presence of BRAF V600E in most patients with HCL suggested that it represents a key driver mutation in the disease.2 Our observations provide evidence to substantiate this concept and validate mutant BRAF as a therapeutic target in HCL. The findings are reminiscent of successes with targeted inhibition of BCR-ABL1 in chronic myeloid leukemia. The fact that heavily pretreated, refractory disease responded to very low doses of vemurafenib suggests that HCL represents a single-kinase–dependent cancer that can be treated with targeted monotherapy.
Although an appropriate dosing schedule will be developed in clinical trials, HCL was exquisitely sensitive to BRAF inhibition. Secondary resistance to BRAF inhibition, which occurs invariably in patients with BRAF-mutant melanoma, might develop in HCL. Because patients with HCL remain in hematologic remission after therapy with purine analogues in spite of minimal residual disease and because other effective drugs are available, resistance may be less challenging in HCL.1
